• Chapter 8
Age Matters
Now that I've stopped dyeing my hair to show my natural silver, more
people call me "ma'am." Plus, more salespeople are asking if I'm eligible for
a senior citizen discount (and sometimes I am). After I stopped coloring my
hair several years ago, people stopped telling me I looked young for my age. I
have mixed feelings about these interactions. I don't want to care what others
think about my age. Yet, I also don't want them to think I am "old," since
being old in our society is undesirable, especially for a woman. Sometimes
people call a man with gray hair "distinguished," but they rarely say that
about a woman. Then again, some people think that gray hair represents wis-
dom, which certainly is true in my case! Fortunately, being gray probably
doesn't hurt my credibility as a professor. It may even work to my advantage.
One of my friends recently told me I'd probably look ten years younger if I
colored my hair.
Can you remember a time when you could not wait to reach a certain
age? Why was that number so important? I've known many college students
who were eager to turn 21. I wonder why [smile]? I remember anxiously
waiting to be 13, a teenager! Because I was born in 1950, I relished the idea
that I would be a half-century old at the turn of the century. When I was
younger, 50 seemed almost ancient. The closer I got to that milestone, and
now that I am beyond it, 50 does not seem that old.
My reflections about age foreshadow some of the issues I illuminate in
this chapter. Categories related to numerical age, such as "senior citizen" or
"teenager," can influence self-esteem, attitudes, and expectations. In addi-
tion, our society has developed laws, policies, and procedures based on age
categories. Rights to vote, to drive, and to drink are tied to age minimums.
Many businesses offer discounts to "senior citizens," a category created
around 1938. The social identity of teenager (created in the 1920s) holds sig-
nificant meaning for individuals, organizations, and institutions, including
educators, legislators, advertisers, employers, entertainment companies, and
clothing manufacturers.
My conflict about my gray, oops, I mean silver, hair demonstrates the
power of societal discourse about aging. My use of "silver" instead of "gray"
shows how word choice conveys meaning. "Gray" connotes dull and gloomy,
while "silver" means shine and luster. "Silver" also refers to a valuable metal.
161
164 Chapter Eight
was 76. The age 85-and-over population has grown 31 times larger since the
beginning of the twentieth century. As of November 2008, the Census Bureau
recorded 96,000 people who were 100 years or older. If that trend continues,
the centenarian population may reach 600,000 by 2050.5
As longevity has increased, so has the health and vitality of the elderly
(persons 60 years of age or older). Only about 5 percent of elderly persons
reside in hospitals or require nursing home care. Most older people will con-
tinue to work, due to economic concerns such as maintaining their house-
hold and caring for aging parents and/or adult children, but also because of a
strong work ethic. Potential policy and program effects of the aging of 76 mil-
lion baby boomers are attracting the interest of both public and private sec-
tors. Baby boomers may affect retirement and transform what it means to be
old in the U.S. Baby boomers are likely to differ from current older adults by
being more willing to advocate for programs, policies, and services.?
Matters of age differ according to other aspects of identity such as race,
gender, and sexuality. Demographers have predicted dramatic increases in
the number of minority elderly, the fastest growing segment of older Ameri-
cans. In the 2000 census, racial-ethnic minorities comprised 16.4 percent of
persons 65 or older; by 2050, over 35 percent of persons 65 or older will be
people of color.® In 2006, racial minorities accounted for nearly one-half of
children under 5 years of age.' Consequently, by 2030, a new type of genera-
tion gap will occur as most young persons will be people of color, and most
elderly persons will be white. This divide will occur in part because of rela-
tively high immigration rates among Hispanics and Asians of child-bearing
age. All of these projections have implications for policy as well as how we
interact with one another.
Women account for four out of five people 100 years of age and older.
Women are more likely to experience chronic illnesses and disabilities
because of their longer lives. They are more likely than men to be single, live
alone, and be poor in their older years. 10 As I noted in the chapter on sexual-
ity, gay baby boomers will experience different challenges than heterosexual
members of this cohort. G L B Q seniors are twice as likely to live alone, and
more than four times as likely to have no children. The bottom line is the
older American population of the twenty-first century will look vastly differ-
ent from the profile of older Americans at the turn of the last century.
These age distinctions matter because members of social identity groups
who have been privileged throughout their lives tend to continue to reap ben-
efits as they age, just as those who have been oppressed usually continue to
suffer. In 1994, a retired man received $785.24 in social security benefits,
while a retired woman received $602.26; similar distinctions occur in race-
gender breakdowns, with white men at the top of the earnings chart, and
women of color at the bottom." Currently, women are less likely to receive
pensions than men. Cumulative effects of disadvantage across life include
chronic health problems, suffering from results of poor nutrition, living in
substandard conditions, and chronic stress. These and other developments
Age Matters 165
can affect public policies related to aging, including public health concerns as
well as employment policies and retirement benefits.
Another growing concern is ageism, "the systematic stereotyping and dis-
crimination against people because they are old." 2 Ageism in the workplace
has become more visible as members of the bulk of the workforce grow older.
(The Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies workers as "older" when they turn
55. However, age bias tends to be much more subtle than other -isms. Some
people may not even realize that they are enacting age ideology. Age discrim-
ination may well become the major civil rights issue during the early part of
the twenty-first century. Workers filed a record number of age bias claims in
2008, up 30 percent from the previous year. I3 Following the lead of other dis-
enfranchised groups, some older people and their allies have created advo-
cacy groups, such as the Gray Panthers and the American Association of
Retired Persons (AARP), "a nonprofit membership organization dedicated to
addressing the needs and interests of persons 50 and older." 14
As numbers of older persons increase, the pool of younger persons is
shrinking due to a drop in birthrate after the baby boom. Thus, the demand
for older workers has increased as numbers of new labor force entrants
decrease. Generation X (persons born between 1960 and 1980) will be the
primary source of labor in the United States for the next 10 years. This group
represents the smallest population in history, and the smallest number of
entry-level workers. Thus, it is highly likely that intergenerational interactions
will occur in workplaces. Some analysts believe that this situation borders on
a crisis as members of different generations tend to have varying values and
ideals related to work. Conflicting needs, as well as wary attitudes toward
one another, may generate opposition between groups.
Children in elementary school today have the potential of living longer
than any previous generation. To help prepare them for longevity, we need
more formal education programs that focus on aging. Although we often
hear about population trends and the increased life span, schools and col-
leges rarely educate or even orient students to prepare them for a long life. 15
Indeed, "most young people still reach adulthood with little preparation for
their own aging. Nor do they recognize the enormous implications of popu-
lation aging as the longevity revolution of the twentieth century spills over
into the twenty-first."I6 When they reach their seventies, they may be seen as
the "young-old" if we reach predicted numbers of centenarians.
In addition to changes in demographics and their potential conse-
quences, age matters because we all confront its effects. Unlike the other cat-
egories of social identity we are exploring, which remain relatively fixed
(except for ability, which can change in the blink of an eye), age identity
changes across our life span. And, we are likely to deal with age-related
issues for our loved ones. Each one of us can potentially become part of an
age group and benefit or suffer accordingly. Therefore, age clearly matters
for everyone.
Age Matters 181
awaken until you go to bed that night. Examples of issues you might
cover include: How will you feel? What will you be doing at that
time in your life? How will you look? With whom will you celebrate?
How will you celebrate? What will you be planning to do for the rest
of your life? How will the world be different than it is today? If you
are 55 or older, write an essay about turning 90, and follow the
instructions above.
7. Have you ever learned about aging during formal school curricula?
Explain.
8. How well do you tend to interact with people 20-or-more years older
than you? Or, with people 10-or-more years younger?
9. Have you ever worked with someone from a different age group than
yours? How was the experience? Did age matter?
10. Do you socialize mainly with people your age? Explain.
11. Have you ever over- or underaccommodated while interacting with
someone older than you? With someone younger? Explain